Reiew of the Paper
Student: Yunfei Luo
May 19, 2020
————————————————————————————————————————
Cold-start Playlist Recommendation with Multitask Learning
Dawei Chen, Cheng Soon Ong, Aditya Krishna Menon
Reference Paper URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.06125
Introduction/Main Goal
This paper was published in 2019. The main goal of this paper is to provide a recommended list of
songs to the users, in the following three scenarios:
a) Recommended list for existing users. (cold playlists)
b) Recommended list for new users. (cold users)
c) Recommended new released songs to users. (cold songs)
The authors proposed a novel Multitask Learning method, and claim that such method could improve the performance of the recommendation.
What’s New/Improvement
The conventional method, matrix factorization, cannot dealing with the ”Cold Start” problem. And
it is challenging for the standard supervised learning to train with users that have multiple playlists.
The authors proposed a novel way of multitask learning method, which basically optimize a bipartite ranking. Moreover, since the previously formulated bipartite ranking is a convex problem
with a great amount of constraints, the authors derived an equivalent unconstrained optimization
for efficiency.
Observations/Analysis
The input data is the encoded feature from the dataset with:
a) song metadata (loudness, mode, tempo)
b) raw audio data, genre, and artistic information of the song
c) the popularity of artist and the song
The output is obviously the list of recommended songs for users with three settings as mentioned
previously.
The overall prediction task is basically finding the numerical optimal solution for the constructed
optimization problem:
minθ R(f, D) + Ω(θ)
Where R is the risk function with affinity function f (affinity of song m in the playlist i for user u)
and dataset D as parameters. Ω is the regularization term on the parameters α, β, µ in the affinity
function f where f (m, u, i) = (αu + βi + µ)T xm , where αu and βi can be learned from the playlists
1

of each user, and µ learned from the entire set of playlist.
Result
The multitask learning method proposed by the authors is compared with other popular recommendation algorithm, include Matrix Factorization and k-Nearest-Neighbors. The result is shown below
(page 6 of the paper):

Where both AUC and hit rate of recommendation in the cold songs setting shows that the proposed method performed better.
Extension/Follow up
The possible extension is to apply such method in other fields. For example, in the task of Student
Stress Prediction, it would be a great extended application that recommend actions to student (e.g.
listen songs, watch videos, etc) based on the predicted results of the mental states of students.

2

